Uses of Shannon's theorem. Theorem 2.8 is of interest in its own right in that it essentially gives a complete characterization of perfectly-secret encryption schemes. In addition, since items (1) and (2) have nothing to do with the probability distribution over the set of plaintexts M, the theorem implies that if there exists an encryption scheme that provides perfect secrecy for a specific probability distribution over M then it actually provides perfect secrecy in general (i.e., for all probability distributions over M). Finally, Shannon's theorem is extremely useful for proving whether a given scheme is or is not perfectly secret. Item (1) is easy to confirm and item (2) can be demonstrated (or contradicted) without analyzing any probabilities. For example, the perfect secrecy of the one-time pad is trivial to prove using Shannon's theorem. We warn, however, that Theorem 2.8 only holds if |M| = |K| = |C|, and so one must be careful to apply it only in this case.

Summary. This completes our treatment of perfectly-secret encryption. The main lesson of this chapter is that perfect secrecy is attainable, meaning that there exist encryption schemes with the property that the ciphertext reveals absolutely nothing about the plaintext even to an adversary with unlimited computational power. However, all such schemes have the limitation that the key must be at least as long as the message. In practice, therefore, perfectly-secret encryption is rarely used. We remark that it is rumored that the red phone linking the White House and the Kremlin during the Cold War was protected using one-time pad encryption. Of course, the governments of the US and USSR could exchange extremely long random keys without great difficulty, and therefore practically use the one-time pad. However, in most settings, especially commercial ones, the limitation regarding the key length makes the one-time pad or any other perfectly-secret scheme unusable.

References and Additional Reading. The notion of perfectly-secret encryption was introduced and studied in ground-breaking work by Shannon. In addition to introducing the notion, he proved that the one-time pad is perfectly secret, and also proved the theorems characterizing perfectly-secret schemes and their implied limitations. Stinson contains further discussion of perfect secrecy. In this chapter we have briefly studied perfectly-secure encryption. There are other cryptographic problems that can also be solved with perfect security. A notable example is the problem of message authentication where the aim is to prevent an adversary from modifying a message in an undetectable manner en route from one party to another; we study this problem in depth in Chapter 4. The reader interested in perfectly-secure message authentication is referred to further literature for additional information.